[Amit Varma]: Many years ago, I was hanging out with a friend of mine in an industrial park.
[Amit Varma]: His name is Narendra and he wasn't, at that time, the Prime Minister of India.
[Amit Varma]: So we were just shooting the breeze, talking about girls and cars and all the books we'd
[Amit Varma]: read, I mean all the books I'd read because he isn't much of a reader, when suddenly it
[Amit Varma]: started raining.
[Amit Varma]: I love the rain and this change in weather put me in a mellow mood.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't this lovely?
[Unknown]: I asked Narendra.
[Unknown]: Yes, it's very romantic, he said as he reached out and touched my arm gently.
[Unknown]: I could really do with some chai and pakoras right now.
[Amit Varma]: I can organise the chai, I replied, but where will we get pakoras from over here?
[Amit Varma]: No one here sells pakoras.
[Amit Varma]: When he heard that, Narendra got very serious.
[Unknown]: He thundered, No one here sells pakoras?
[Unknown]: That is preposterous.
[Unknown]: This must change.
[Unknown]: I will change it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Before we start today's episode, a note from our sponsors.
[Amit Varma]: If you love art, but find the work of top Indian artists too expensive to buy and hang
[Amit Varma]: on your walls, here's a solution.
[Amit Varma]: Hop on over to IndianColours.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colours is a company that licenses the work of top Indian artists and adapts
[Amit Varma]: it into objects of everyday use, including wearable art like stoles and kaftans, home
[Amit Varma]: decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to get fine art into their homes at an accessible price, and artists
[Amit Varma]: get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: The artists whose works you'll find include luminaries like Samir Mondal, Vasco X Vaxo,
[Amit Varma]: Brinda Miller, Shruti Nelson, Harin Vakil, and the brilliant Dhruvi Acharya.
[Amit Varma]: Do check it out at IndianColours.com, that's Colours with an OU, and use the code IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount.
[Amit Varma]: Remember IVM20 at IndianColours.com, Colours with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And now, on with our regular programming.
[Amit Varma]: My guests today are my good friends and regular guests on the show, Vivek Kaul and Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek and Shruti, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Amit.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek is here with me in the studio, while Shruti is connected to us via Skype.
[Amit Varma]: The topic for today is pakoda-nomics, I hope I pronounced that correctly.
[Amit Varma]: Pakoda, not ra.
[Amit Varma]: Pakoda, yeah, it's my Bengali nest egg.
[Amit Varma]: You can even call it bonda-nomics, because bondas are more famous south of the wind.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not the word Mr. Modi used.
[Amit Varma]: So pakoda-nomics is inspired by a recent quote from our Prime Minister, Narendra Modi.
[Amit Varma]: Here's what he said, quote, if someone opens a pakora shop in front of your office, does
[Amit Varma]: that not count as employment?
[Amit Varma]: The person's daily earning of rupees 200 will never come into books or accounts.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is, massive people are being employed, end quote.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's true that some massive people like me are indeed employed.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, I had a hard time trying to figure out just exactly what Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Modi was trying to say here.
[Amit Varma]: So Vivek, what was he trying to say?
[Guest 2]: So basically, you know, what I think he was trying to say is that we need to differentiate
[Guest 2]: between employment and jobs.
[Guest 2]: It is not about creating jobs, as you know, we tend to argue over and over again, but
[Guest 2]: it is about creating employment.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's a valid point.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the second point that he was perhaps trying to make is that you shouldn't expect
[Guest 2]: the government to create jobs for around 1 million Indians who are entering the workforce
[Guest 2]: every month, and for around 8.4 crore Indians who need to move, be moved out of agriculture
[Guest 2]: so that agriculture becomes economically feasible.
[Guest 2]: These were the two points that he made and his solution was that, you know, anyone who's
[Guest 2]: sort of selling pakoras on the street, or anyone, you know, is selling anything for
[Guest 2]: that matter on the street, because pakoras are just incidental here, is also making money.
[Guest 2]: And that is adding to the employment.
[Guest 2]: So but I think, you know, that something like this shouldn't have come from the Prime Minister
[Guest 2]: of the country, at least.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on, I want to take a really layman's approach to this this episode and
[Amit Varma]: ask you to elaborate on your point about jobs and employment.
[Guest 2]: What do you mean jobs and employment are not the same thing?
[Guest 2]: Okay, so jobs, I mean, let's say, you know, you were working for Wisden quick info at
[Guest 2]: a certain point of time, that that was a job right now, you don't work for anyone, you
[Guest 2]: work for anyone who gives you work, that is employment, right?
[Guest 2]: So as long as people are employed, and gainfully employed, and are getting paid reasonably
[Guest 2]: for it, I don't think it matters whether, you know, they have a job or not.
[Guest 2]: So I guess, so the debate should not be that India is not creating enough jobs, or India
[Guest 2]: is creating enough jobs, or whether India is creating enough jobs, but the debate should
[Guest 2]: be whether India is creating enough employment for the people who need it.
[Guest 2]: And is it?
[Amit Varma]: Of course not.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we are not, we are nowhere near creating enough employment, as much as is needed.
[Amit Varma]: And we have 1 million people coming into the workforce every month, like you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: that's 10 lakh people and nowhere near that amount of jobs are being created.
[Guest 2]: Yes, I mean, so one of the, you know, recent estimates that CMI Centre for Monitoring Indian
[Guest 2]: Economy came up with was that in the year 2017, around 2 million opportunities were
[Guest 2]: created and nearly 11.5 million Indians entered the workforce.
[Guest 2]: Now, we need to sort of also state here very, very clearly that India does not have very
[Guest 2]: high employment, very high unemployment, sorry, which is primarily because of the fact that
[Guest 2]: anyone who does not, you know, get a job in India, ultimately ends up in self employment.
[Guest 2]: So our unemployment rates are extremely low.
[Guest 2]: In fact, the International Labour Organization just came out with numbers, and the rate of
[Guest 2]: unemployment in India is something like 3.5%.
[Guest 2]: Now which is, I mean, then the next question to ask is, you know, why are we even, you
[Guest 2]: know, talking about all this if unemployment levels are so low?
[Amit Varma]: So, is it your point, like I've often heard it said that our problem isn't unemployment
[Guest 2]: as much as underemployment?
[Guest 2]: So which is, you know, our unemployment rates are low, because everyone's doing something.
[Guest 2]: But the question is, whether that something is productive enough, and the answer is no.
[Amit Varma]: And like recently, I heard about some PM's job in Delhi, where there were like 20 vacancies
[Amit Varma]: and some 40,000 people have applied, including hundreds of PhDs and MAs and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that, I mean, that points to dual problems.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of those problems, of course, is that a lot of the education system, you've
[Amit Varma]: had credential inflation in the sense it's, you know, those degrees have kind of become
[Amit Varma]: meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: And people aren't really being trained for the workforce, there is a mismatch between
[Amit Varma]: education and what the labour market wants.
[Guest 2]: And this is something you've, you know, you and I have spoken about in a previous podcast.
[Guest 2]: So basically, what is happening there is twofold.
[Guest 2]: One is that, you know, all these MBAs and PhDs and graduates that we are producing,
[Guest 2]: a huge number of them are simply unemployable.
[Guest 2]: And the second thing is that at lower levels, the government is a significantly better paymaster
[Guest 2]: than the private sector.
[Guest 2]: So there was this study carried out, you know, by the 7th Pay Commission, and this is these
[Guest 2]: are 2013-14 numbers.
[Guest 2]: And they figured out that, you know, at the junior most level, you know, what they call
[Guest 2]: euphemistically called a helper, but basically meant a peon, the government salaries are
[Guest 2]: at around 21-22,000 rupees per month, whereas the private sector pays around anywhere from
[Guest 2]: 8 to 9,000.
[Guest 2]: So which is why you get so many people and so many qualified people applying for all
[Guest 2]: these jobs.
[Guest 2]: And then job security also.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, job security, then, you know, you obviously have this huge fascination for
[Guest 2]: government jobs in India, then, I mean, at any level, you at least have this thought
[Guest 2]: that you will make some other income as well, you know, beyond what you get as your salary
[Guest 2]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So Shruti, I want you to chime in here.
[Amit Varma]: My question to you is that, you know, one of the points which Vivek pointed out Modi
[Amit Varma]: was probably making is that, hey, it's not my government's job to create jobs, which
[Amit Varma]: I know all three of us would kind of agree with while traditionally, it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you'll have politicians taking credit for job creation, and you'll have people criticizing
[Amit Varma]: this government or that government for not creating jobs.
[Amit Varma]: But what government can't actually create jobs, right?
[Amit Varma]: So where do jobs come from?
[Guest 1]: The government doesn't have an obligation to create jobs, and the government can't actually
[Guest 1]: manufacture productivity.
[Guest 1]: It's quite the reverse.
[Guest 1]: Usually, when the government starts releasing employment schemes and programs, it's the
[Guest 1]: opposite of productivity.
[Guest 1]: However, the government does have an obligation to create an environment that is conducive
[Guest 1]: for private individuals to be able to find their optimal job and for skills to be matched
[Guest 1]: to requirements in a very, you know, fairly low transaction cost way within an economy.
[Guest 1]: So to that extent, the government does have an obligation to create an environment that
[Guest 1]: will then itself create jobs.
[Amit Varma]: So what you'd mean by that is, for example, that the government would have to do things
[Amit Varma]: like maintain the rule of law, enforce contracts, and so on, on the one hand, while on the other
[Amit Varma]: hand, getting out of the way of voluntary exchanges within society and not having too
[Amit Varma]: much of the license and regulation, Raj, basically, which acts as a dampener on private enterprise
[Amit Varma]: and raises transaction costs.
[Guest 1]: One of the things that's happening in India is that, as a country, we have made it too
[Guest 1]: costly to employ unskilled labor.
[Guest 1]: And when it's too costly, then the skill level has to be higher.
[Guest 1]: That is to make it worthwhile to hire that particular labor and pay that wage, or it
[Guest 1]: has to come in terms of productivity.
[Guest 1]: It's a labor surplus country, but manufacturers are reluctant to hire labor and employ other
[Guest 1]: substitutes for labor.
[Guest 1]: Now, in the process, the people have to do something.
[Guest 1]: So one is in many developed countries where there are unemployed benefits and so on and
[Guest 1]: so forth.
[Guest 1]: You see these people reflected in unemployment figures, as Vivek pointed out, that doesn't
[Guest 1]: happen in India.
[Guest 1]: So these people get reflected or rather get hidden in self-employment, in culture or street
[Guest 1]: vending or so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: So what is happening in India is we see very little of the problem in terms of data points,
[Guest 1]: but we see the problem everywhere.
[Guest 1]: People are not that productive and people are not that rich.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things I've noticed in recent discourse is that, especially after
[Amit Varma]: demonetization and GST, is that the informal economy gets a bad name.
[Amit Varma]: But the point I keep making is that the informal economy only exists because you made it so
[Amit Varma]: hard for the formal economy to function.
[Amit Varma]: So all these people who can't get jobs in the formal economy because of these labor
[Amit Varma]: laws and the variety of other regulations and all have no choice but to be part of the
[Amit Varma]: informal economy.
[Amit Varma]: They're not there out of choice.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of these people who are self-employed are not self-employed in the glamorous way
[Amit Varma]: that I, for example, that Vivek and me are, where we are, you know, freelance columnists
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, but are self-employed in the sense of, say, the pakora seller, who don't
[Amit Varma]: have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty much all they can do to survive.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, there are two aspects to the problem that you just pointed out.
[Guest 1]: The first is when the English speaking elite or elite who are tweeting that there's really
[Guest 1]: nothing wrong with what the prime minister said.
[Guest 1]: I mean, they're right in the sense that factually, there's nothing wrong with what the prime
[Guest 1]: minister said.
[Guest 1]: But their priors about self-employment are completely different from what is the reality
[Guest 1]: on the ground.
[Guest 1]: For most of us, like you mentioned, especially you and Vivek, you are self-employed out of
[Guest 1]: choice.
[Guest 1]: That is, your choice of being self-employed is far superior to the alternatives of the
[Guest 1]: kinds of jobs that you might get.
[Guest 1]: Now, what happens with the street vendors, the exact opposite.
[Guest 1]: They would really like to get a job.
[Guest 1]: They would like the security of the job, but they can't seem to find a job and they have
[Guest 1]: to make a living.
[Guest 1]: So they are self-employed as last resort.
[Guest 1]: And it is very difficult to be a street vendor in India.
[Guest 1]: I don't think given a choice, most of these people would want to be self-employed.
[Guest 1]: There's a secondary aspect to it.
[Guest 1]: Normally, when we think about entrepreneurs, you would think, oh, so today he's selling
[Guest 1]: pakoras as a street vendor.
[Guest 1]: Now, if he's really entrepreneurial tomorrow, that pakora enterprise will become bigger.
[Guest 1]: Maybe he'll go from a cart to a food truck.
[Guest 1]: Maybe he'll go from a food truck to a restaurant.
[Guest 1]: Now that is the conventional thinking about self-employment and entrepreneurship when
[Guest 1]: you look at the West.
[Guest 1]: That never happens in India.
[Guest 1]: When we say, is it not jobs when a pakora seller makes 200 rupees a day?
[Guest 1]: Let's be very clear, there is no upward mobility there.
[Guest 1]: He's going to continue making 200 rupees a day.
[Guest 1]: It's never going to turn into a pakora shop.
[Guest 1]: It's never going to turn into one of those places where, you know, pakora store, AC at
[Guest 1]: the first floor and non-AC in the second floor.
[Guest 1]: That's not happening.
[Guest 1]: So the self-employment also has a very, very clear ceiling in terms of future growth and
[Amit Varma]: productivity and opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: So before I cut back to Vivek, just break that down for me.
[Amit Varma]: Why can't he scale up?
[Amit Varma]: Like why can't the pakora stall become a pakora chain?
[Guest 1]: The pakora is affordable at that price for a regular person who might also be self-employed
[Guest 1]: or trapped in a low productivity environment.
[Guest 1]: So if pakoras are selling at, say, 50 rupees a plate or 30 rupees a plate, then to make
[Guest 1]: it at that price, you can only do it on a street cart because it is just simply too
[Guest 1]: costly to scale it up into any kind of formal establishment, because formal establishments
[Guest 1]: require all kinds of permits and licenses and health inspections.
[Guest 1]: And I mean, there are different surveys done in different cities on how many gazillion
[Guest 1]: units you need to open a small shop or a restaurant.
[Guest 1]: I'm not exactly aware of what it is for an eatery in Mumbai in the exact locality where
[Guest 1]: you are, but I would guess it's pretty high.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, Vivek, let me sort of come back to you here.
[Amit Varma]: You published a column on the day we are recording, which is January 24th.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: January 24th.
[Guest 2]: It's Awareness Day.
[Amit Varma]: You're listening to this on the next Monday, or rather this is released on the next Monday.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote this column about pakoranomics, coining that most excellent term, which I'm
[Amit Varma]: very fond of.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of broke down Prime Minister Modi's logic.
[Amit Varma]: So can I ask you to sort of go over your chain of thinking again?
[Guest 2]: Sure.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, first and foremost, I didn't come up with the example of pakora Mr. Modi
[Guest 2]: did.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a very important point.
[Amit Varma]: But pakoranomics is your coinage.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, pakoranomics was my coinage.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, we shouldn't be getting here into the unit economics of how profitable
[Guest 2]: it is to sell pakoras, because, you know, we all know of some pakodawala who made it
[Unknown]: big.
[Guest 2]: You know, I was tweeting about this and one gentleman sort of tweeted back that there
[Guest 2]: was some pakodawala in Borivali, which is Mumbai suburb, which, you know, who had to
[Guest 2]: face a raid by the income tax department.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are always exceptions like that.
[Guest 2]: But a pakodawala essentially is a representation of a self-employed individual who is trying
[Guest 2]: to make money by selling some stuff on the streets.
[Guest 2]: And we have too many people selling too many things on the streets of India.
[Guest 2]: I mean, this is a point that we need to keep in mind.
[Guest 2]: Now, if you look at the fact that Mr. Modi talked about the pakodawala making rupees
[Guest 2]: 200 per day, that works out to around rupees 73,000 a year, the average per capita income
[Guest 2]: in 2016-17 of an average Indian was around 1.03 lakhs.
[Guest 2]: So an average Indian essentially made 41% more than Mr. Modi's pakodawala.
[Guest 2]: So there is a problem there.
[Guest 2]: I mean, obviously, someone's got to, you know, when we're talking averages, someone will
[Guest 2]: make lower than the average.
[Guest 2]: But you know, 41% gap is a little too much.
[Guest 2]: Then the second point that we need to keep in mind is that the pakodawala, you know,
[Guest 2]: unlike me, would definitely not be single.
[Guest 2]: I mean, he would have a, I'm using, you know, I'm saying he because pakodawalas in India
[Guest 2]: typically are men, would typically have a family.
[Guest 2]: Now, assuming, you know, the average Indian household has five people.
[Guest 2]: Now, if this pakodawala has, you know, a wife and three children, then we are talking about,
[Guest 2]: you know, a per capita of around 14,000 rupees per person per year, which is not a huge thing.
[Guest 2]: So what we need to understand here is that, you know, all these pakodawalas and self-employment
[Guest 2]: guys are essentially, as Shruti said, not there by choice, but because they don't have
[Guest 2]: a choice because there are no jobs available or there are no jobs available for the skill
[Guest 2]: set that they have, making pakodawalas, hawking stuff on the street is very easy.
[Guest 2]: You need very little capital to start off.
[Guest 2]: Now, you know, if you look at, you know, there's some very interesting data that gets put out
[Guest 2]: by the Labor Bureau, you know, and they sort of suggest that close to half of India's workforce
[Guest 2]: is self-employed.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the exact percentage is 46.3, but since we live in an era of, you know, hyping
[Guest 2]: and overhyping things, so, you know, I've rounded off 46 to 50 percent.
[Guest 2]: Now, half of India's workforce is self-employed, which is too high a number anyway, right?
[Guest 2]: If you look at their income brackets, very, very interesting, around 41 percent of these,
[Guest 2]: you know, self-employed people make up to rupees 5,000 rupees a month, which is up to
[Guest 2]: rupees 60,000 rupees a year, around 67 percent make up to rupees 90,000 a year, only 4 percent
[Guest 2]: make more than 2,40,000 a year.
[Guest 2]: So most of these pakodawalas slash self-employed people do not even come into the income tax
[Guest 2]: bracket, okay?
[Guest 2]: So the prime minister of a country sort of, you know, selling this as a vocation, I mean,
[Guest 2]: that's not on.
[Guest 2]: The other point I sort of wanted to make here is that, so there's clearly a problem with
[Guest 2]: being self-employed.
[Guest 2]: Now, what is happening now is that self-employment is sort of being mistaken, or rather, you
[Guest 2]: know, the propaganda is that self-employment is entrepreneurship, which it is not.
[Guest 2]: Entrepreneurship and self-employment are two very, very different terms, which we need
[Guest 2]: to distinguish between, and entrepreneur is always an entrepreneur by choice.
[Guest 2]: It may not be by, may or may not be by choice.
[Guest 2]: So this is a very important, you know, difference that, you know, that needs to come out.
[Guest 2]: Also, you know, if you look at, you know, the numbers of people, if you look at the
[Guest 2]: income of people who are self-employed, I mean, as I said, 41 percent of them make up
[Guest 2]: to rupees 60,000 a year, that is way less than the average per capita income.
[Amit Varma]: That's less than the pakodawala, in fact, of Mr. Modi.
[Guest 2]: That's less than the pakodawala.
[Guest 2]: So the larger point here is that Indians have been pakodawalas for a few decades now.
[Guest 2]: We have been self-employed for a few decades now because we haven't got enough jobs, enough
[Guest 2]: employment opportunities, enough viable employment opportunities going around.
[Guest 2]: So this is not a new idea.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's just like, you know, old wine in a new bottle, which Mr. Modi is very good
[Amit Varma]: at.
[Amit Varma]: Am I correct to say that the pakodawala is not so much a solution as a symptom of the
[Amit Varma]: problem which Mr. Modi is sort of ignoring and turning away from?
[Guest 1]: You have nailed it.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, Amit and Vivek, just to jump in here, I don't think in general it's a very
[Guest 1]: productive idea to pick one sentence that the prime minister of a country says and then
[Guest 1]: pick it apart the way we usually do on Twitter.
[Guest 1]: But here I think it's really important to do it because it seems that the prime minister
[Guest 1]: in this one sentence has captured exactly how much we are missing the point when it
[Guest 1]: comes to good economic reform.
[Guest 1]: By pointing out the biggest symptom of the problem as an example of success, in this
[Guest 1]: case the pakodawala who earns 200 rupees by being self-employed because there's literally
[Guest 1]: no other choice for him.
[Guest 1]: That I think is a bad idea coming from the leadership of the country, which is in charge
[Guest 1]: of economic reform.
[Amit Varma]: And that shows a mindset problem, that shows that at some level, you know, our political
[Amit Varma]: class still hasn't figured out what the fundamental problem is.
[Guest 2]: I don't agree with that.
[Guest 2]: I think they know very well what the problem is, it's just that they can't do anything
[Guest 2]: about it.
[Guest 2]: Given the number of structural reforms that are required and given the fact that we haven't
[Guest 2]: had them for a while now.
[Guest 2]: So see, every politician needs to fight and win elections.
[Guest 2]: Elections happen every five years.
[Guest 2]: These structural reforms are to be initiated and if we were to sort of wait for the results,
[Guest 2]: it would be a decade, decade and a half.
[Guest 2]: So the politicians need to do something in between.
[Guest 2]: Which is why I think, you know, what this, you know, the current dispensation is very
[Guest 2]: good at, is sort of taking the attention of people away from the real problem.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, Mr. Modi was elected on the plank of jobs, employment, and, you know,
[Guest 2]: economic development, minimum government, maximum governance, but all that's now fallen
[Guest 2]: by the wayside.
[Guest 2]: What we have is Padmavat, which is basically Padmavati or Padmavat, whatever you might
[Guest 2]: call it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, from people who have seen the movie, I mean, they say it's a right-winger's wet
[Guest 2]: dream.
[Guest 2]: And, but, you know, you look at the kind of protests that are happening against the movie.
[Guest 2]: Now, if, you know, if the right wing can protest and protest so successfully against what is
[Guest 2]: a right-winger's wet dream, imagine the kind of nuisance they can keep creating against
[Guest 2]: other, you know, cultural and other, you know, economic issues that keep propping up.
[Guest 2]: So these are, you know, you basically want to take the attention away from the real problem.
[Guest 2]: So then you make statements like, so this has been happening for a while.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, before he made this pakora statement, he's also been talking about the fact as to
[Guest 2]: how mudra loans are creating employment.
[Guest 2]: Now an average mudra loan is around 23,000 rupees.
[Guest 2]: So I don't know how that is creating employment, but Mr. Modi believes that, you know, every
[Guest 2]: person who takes on a mudra loan has two, three more people and there's a multiplier
[Guest 2]: effect.
[Guest 2]: There has been no study which has shown this.
[Guest 2]: The CEO of mudra has gone on record to say that we do not have any data on, you know,
[Guest 2]: the number of jobs or employment opportunities that mudra loans have created.
[Guest 2]: So this has been happening for a while when you cannot deliver on what you have promised,
[Guest 2]: then you have to sort of create, you know, and say things which take away attention from
[Guest 2]: the real issues.
[Guest 1]: I would want to add one more thing to what Vivek is saying.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I partially agree with him that a part of this whole pakora story is just, you
[Guest 1]: know, some part of it is just spin, right, to deviate from the real problem.
[Guest 1]: The first is what Vivek pointed out as the underemployment, which is masked as self-employment.
[Guest 1]: But there's a second thing hidden in this number, which we haven't talked about yet.
[Guest 1]: As Vivek pointed out, there's very low levels of unemployment in India.
[Guest 1]: Now what is unemployment?
[Guest 1]: Unemployment is people who are looking for a job and can't find a job.
[Guest 1]: Now one of the things that the self-employment story and this whole, you know, the fiasco
[Guest 1]: over the pakorawala tells us is, in India, people have stopped looking for jobs maybe
[Guest 1]: because they know that it is that difficult for jobs to come by.
[Guest 1]: It's almost impossible to find one when you have 20,000 applications for four vacancies
[Guest 1]: for an office helper or something like that.
[Guest 1]: So then the alternative is just to go into self-employment.
[Guest 2]: Which is true.
[Guest 2]: I'll just, you know, budge in here.
[Guest 1]: Which is true.
[Guest 2]: If you look at the CMI data, which came out a while back, so they have said that the labor
[Guest 2]: force participation rate has come down.
[Guest 2]: So you're right.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So, so he's, you know, applauding the 200 rupee pakorawala while I think they need to
[Guest 1]: be applauded for a completely different reason, which is that they work in a hostile environment.
[Guest 1]: But Mr. Modi's reason for applauding the 200 rupee pakorawala is really trying to mask
[Guest 1]: both the reasons for the unemployment data point, which is people might have just given
[Guest 1]: up and the reason for the self-employment data point, which is just, it is underemployment
[Guest 1]: or, you know, you just need to eke out a living and look after your family and you have no
[Guest 1]: other choice, but to do something that seems relatively obvious and easier than the alternative.
[Amit Varma]: And Shruti, what do you say about people giving up on getting a job is actually very poignant,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in an earlier episode, I was chatting with JP Narayan about the state of Indian
[Amit Varma]: politics today.
[Amit Varma]: And he pointed out that two of the qualities that, you know, characterize the essence of
[Amit Varma]: the Indian voter are fatalism and tribalism, and it could even be argued that one leads
[Amit Varma]: to the other.
[Guest 1]: But can you really blame the average Indian person?
[Guest 1]: I mean, the three of us sitting and recording this podcast are not the average Indian person.
[Amit Varma]: Can you really blame them for being fatalistic about their situation?
[Amit Varma]: I meant that as explanation, not condemnation at all.
[Guest 1]: I mean,
[Guest 1]: Yeah, no, no, I understand that.
[Guest 1]: I mean, things are just really, really difficult for the average young Indian male joining
[Guest 1]: the job force.
[Guest 1]: It's really difficult.
[Guest 1]: And one part of that is, you know, what Vivek mentioned in terms of to hide that fact, you
[Guest 1]: know, there's a lot of political drama over Padmavat and things like that.
[Guest 1]: But the other fact is, these young men and women need to be employed in some way.
[Guest 1]: And when they can't get that, they find different ways to protest.
[Guest 1]: And sometimes the most obvious thing that annoys you or offends you is a great way to
[Guest 1]: channel your energy because it's not like the economy allows them to channel their energy
[Amit Varma]: in a productive fashion.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, that makes Padmavat also a symptom of sorts, like one of the things we're
[Amit Varma]: all agreed on.
[Amit Varma]: And I've been writing about it for ages is that Narendra Modi has always been a man who
[Amit Varma]: cares more about optics than anything else, and perhaps with good reason, because most
[Amit Varma]: people don't care about reality, but about the narrative, the nurturing in their heads
[Amit Varma]: and optics plays directly to that.
[Amit Varma]: So he's always in campaigning mode, even after 2014.
[Amit Varma]: He never exactly got into governance mode, which is where I want to focus my next question
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, Vivek, the point you made about, you know, they know what reforms have
[Amit Varma]: to be made, but they're not possible because of structural reasons, by which you mean,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what the political economy is like, and those changes are simply not possible.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, they just resort to optics, thereby implying that the system is so sclerotic
[Amit Varma]: that things can never improve for the better.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, can you elaborate on that to give me a sense of what it's like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: we all agree on certain labor laws, which need to be changed, we all agree on certain,
[Amit Varma]: a whole bunch of regulations and licensing laws, which, if they changed, would allow
[Amit Varma]: greater employment in the formal sector.
[Amit Varma]: But give me a sense of what are the sort of obstacles in their way, which prevent that
[Guest 2]: from happening?
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: So I was, you know, recently reading a column in the Business Standard written by A.K.
[Guest 2]: Bhattacharya.
[Guest 2]: So Mr. Bhattacharya points out, and I didn't know this, that there are 260 labor laws in
[Guest 2]: the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest 2]: And I mean, I knew for a fact that there are around 200 labor laws all across India, state
[Guest 2]: and central labor laws, but Jammu and Kashmir seems to have outdone all of that.
[Guest 2]: And they have 260 labor laws.
[Guest 2]: Now they're trying to, so the state of J&K is trying to sort of come up with some sort
[Guest 2]: of a code which summarizes these laws.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, that's a different point.
[Guest 2]: The point is, you know, every time governments have tried labor law reforms, I mean, and
[Guest 2]: this includes Mr. Vajpayee, who tried some reforms in, you know, in the early 2000s,
[Guest 2]: there have been grave protests from labor unions.
[Guest 2]: Now, labor unions in India, as you would know, are politically affiliated.
[Guest 2]: And ultimately, given the fact that they are politically affiliated and they are organized,
[Guest 2]: they have a huge nuisance value.
[Guest 2]: I mean, look at, you know, banks, I mean, the government of India owns 21 banks.
[Guest 2]: I mean, why does the government need to own 21 banks?
[Guest 2]: Some of these banks like, look at a bank like IDBI, it has a bad loans ratio of 25%.
[Guest 2]: So why are we running these banks and wasting so much money?
[Guest 2]: But ultimately, the point is the moment, you know, any government decides to sort of either
[Guest 2]: privatize or even shut down any of these banks, there will be a huge hangama because all these
[Guest 2]: unions, you know, they're all very well organized and nobody wants to get into that.
[Guest 2]: Look at Air India, I mean, we've been talking about privatization of Air India for close
[Guest 2]: to a year now.
[Guest 2]: But still, nothing is, you know, nothing concrete has happened.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they've done, you know, they've said that, you know, we'll sell the company and
[Guest 2]: the employees will be protected.
[Guest 2]: But then, you know, you need to, if they were serious about selling Air India, you know,
[Guest 2]: by now, we would have known as to what are the terms and conditions, which come attached
[Guest 2]: with it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, does the buyer take on the debt of the company?
[Guest 2]: What happens to the employees?
[Guest 2]: Can the employees be fired, so on and so forth?
[Guest 2]: But that has not happened.
[Guest 2]: So essentially, you know, no, I think the...
[Amit Varma]: But is that a lack of will on their part or the friction in the system?
[Guest 1]: I mean, both.
[Guest 1]: It's both.
[Guest 1]: And it's also, I think, so as Vivek pointed out, the unions are a huge nuisance there.
[Guest 1]: And I want to add to that, that the other group that is a huge nuisance value.
[Guest 1]: So you know, just off tangent for a minute, in standard public choice theory, we call
[Guest 1]: this the transitional gains trap, which basically means that everyone, most people agree or
[Guest 1]: everyone agrees that moving from system one to system two is beneficial.
[Guest 1]: But when you move or transition from system one to system two, there are some winners
[Guest 1]: and losers.
[Guest 1]: And if the losers manage to organize themselves very well, then they can actually prevent
[Guest 1]: the transition from system one to system two, which would benefit everybody largely.
[Guest 1]: So now, what you need to think about is, like Vivek pointed out the example of the labor
[Guest 1]: unions, we need to figure out who are these groups, who are the winners and losers for
[Guest 1]: each of these categories of regulation or licensing.
[Guest 1]: And it's pretty difficult, but I think we can summarize it in two big groups.
[Guest 1]: The first is, of course, labor unions, which is the, you know, extremely formal, well-protected
[Guest 1]: fraction of the economy compared to this huge part, which is completely vulnerable in the
[Guest 1]: informal sector.
[Guest 1]: The other is the bureaucrats.
[Guest 1]: Now, if we get rid of all the stupid licensing requirements, then how are they going to make
[Guest 1]: the rents that they wish to make or their entire reason for getting into a particular
[Guest 1]: kind of job to get those rents will be defeated.
[Guest 1]: So you actually, when Vivek says structural problems, it's not just frictions from outside.
[Guest 1]: It's also frictions from within a very large part of the government, which is the bureaucracy,
[Guest 1]: which never really goes away.
[Guest 1]: You know, legislators are elected every five years.
[Guest 1]: The bureaucracy is just there forever.
[Guest 1]: They are extremely well organized, and it is very difficult to do things that are not
[Guest 1]: in their interest.
[Guest 1]: So it's very difficult to change things.
[Guest 1]: Now, having said that, I want to defend the prime minister here a little bit, and I also
[Guest 1]: want to zero in on where I place the blame.
[Guest 1]: I want to defend the prime minister in the following fashion.
[Guest 1]: The mess is really too large for one person at the top or a small group of legislators
[Guest 1]: at the center to do anything about it.
[Guest 1]: Now, labor laws are concurrent list.
[Guest 1]: You can legislate at the center or the state.
[Guest 1]: There's nothing that prevents states from adding amendments, which many states have
[Guest 1]: to improve the mess that is the labor law in their particular environment.
[Guest 1]: So we are not seeing any leadership at the state level either, which we could have.
[Guest 1]: I mean, nothing precludes the leadership at the state level from doing something different
[Guest 1]: from what the center is suggesting.
[Guest 1]: So the first is, you know, there is a lot of regulation at the corporate level, at the
[Guest 1]: state bureaucracy level, at the state legislation level, which I think it's a little unfair
[Guest 1]: and difficult to pin the blame on the prime minister, not just this one, but any prime
[Guest 1]: minister.
[Guest 1]: Now, having said that, where do I think we can impose some responsibility, if not blame
[Guest 1]: on the prime minister?
[Guest 1]: I think the leadership has to set out the ideas and the agenda at the top.
[Guest 1]: And that is something that we find missing.
[Guest 1]: The spin story of saying pakodawalas are doing just fine, and it's a sign of the Indian economy
[Guest 1]: doing well, sets a very poor example.
[Guest 1]: The example needs to be that what can the government at the union level do to help governments
[Guest 1]: at the state level untangle the regulatory mess and make it easier or have a more conducive
[Guest 1]: environment for jobs?
[Guest 1]: That is completely missing from the current leadership.
[Guest 1]: So on that aspect, I do think that the union leadership can do the lot and they're really
[Guest 1]: not doing anything.
[Guest 1]: They're just deviating from the matter, spinning stories, traveling here and there, talking
[Amit Varma]: about all sorts of irrelevant nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: But Shruti, to sort of go back to the question of the prime minister's vision and concurrent
[Amit Varma]: lists and so on, the fact of the matter is that Mr. Modi boasted recently about how the
[Amit Varma]: BJP today rules more states than Indira Gandhi did.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the BJP is in power at the center and at many of the states.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, take Gujarat alone, for example, if he really had the will to make these changes
[Amit Varma]: in the conviction that they were necessary, surely he would have made more progress than
[Amit Varma]: he had.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm, you know, I totally understand that there's a lot of friction within the system,
[Amit Varma]: both from inside the government in terms of the bureaucratic structures and from outside
[Amit Varma]: in terms of unions and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, my sense is that the current political leadership and every single
[Amit Varma]: political leadership before it in the history of independent India simply doesn't understand
[Amit Varma]: what needs to be done.
[Guest 1]: I'm not so, well, yes and no to your question.
[Guest 1]: Yes, in the sense that I do think the current leadership and previous leaderships have been
[Guest 1]: extremely lacking, no, in the sense that I do think as civil society in India, we need
[Guest 1]: to start blaming more responsibility on different tiers of government and different individuals
[Guest 1]: as opposed to focusing all our attention at one tier of government and one man or woman.
[Guest 1]: So I think that is one area where I might disagree.
[Guest 1]: That's the reason I jumped to the prime minister's defense, not because of what's going on is
[Guest 1]: amazing, it's quite dismal, but I think we need to make state, you know, chief ministers,
[Guest 1]: we need to make local corporators, we need to name these people, impose blame and responsibility
[Guest 1]: on them and actually hold them accountable, right?
[Guest 1]: So that is my limited point.
[Amit Varma]: But my point is, the BJP is in power practically everywhere, 18 states, if I'm not mistaken,
[Amit Varma]: plus the center.
[Amit Varma]: So what is the philosophy of the party on all these issues?
[Amit Varma]: What are its positions?
[Amit Varma]: Not only are they not clearly articulated, the only articulations we get are populist
[Amit Varma]: articulations, which are good for optical reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But not only are these kinds of reforms not articulated as something that is necessary,
[Amit Varma]: that across the board, in most places, there's no effort to actually do anything.
[Guest 2]: But anyway, I mean, leaving that aside.
[Guest 1]: It's a longer discussion for another day.
[Guest 1]: It's a longer discussion.
[Guest 1]: But in one sense, I don't think that is a problem or a malady that is BJP centric or
[Amit Varma]: unique.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: I mean, no matter which party and when you ask what is their goal or agenda, it's the
[Guest 2]: same as every party which is giving the most number of seats and hold on to the most power
[Guest 2]: in most states.
[Guest 2]: I guess I'll summarize that.
[Guest 2]: So basically, I keep this is something I keep writing on that, writing that India has only
[Guest 2]: one model of governance, and which is the Congress model of governance.
[Unknown]: So which is absolutely true.
[Guest 2]: As long as we, you know, keep following that model of governance, you cannot get different
[Amit Varma]: results by doing the same thing over and over again.
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi is in power because of all the misgovernance of the last six and a half decades.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact of the matter is that every political party in India is pretty much left of center
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to economics, and doesn't believe in social freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like for a libertarian like me, that's the worst of both worlds.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And in one sense, I think Mr. Modi's government is the most close analogy I can find is Mrs.
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi's government.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: There is a high degree of centralization of power, a high degree of suppression of economic
[Guest 1]: freedom, except that is the line that Mrs. Gandhi fully bought into.
[Guest 1]: I think with Mr. Modi's current situation, there is a little bit of a spin.
[Guest 1]: They seem to suggest that they want economic liberalization, but there's still suppression
[Guest 1]: of economic freedom.
[Guest 1]: And they both suppress social freedom in completely different ways.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: In Mr. Modi's case, what is happening right now in the country and the protests, like
[Guest 1]: I just saw a horrific video of kids in a school bus being targeted by some foul group or the
[Guest 1]: other.
[Guest 1]: And Mrs. Gandhi did it in a completely different way.
[Guest 1]: She also hurt minorities and, you know, forcible sterilizations and all sorts of horror.
[Guest 1]: So I mean, I don't think this is a BJP centric problem.
[Guest 1]: I think this is a Indian governance model, I think it's a design flaw, like Vivek pointed
[Guest 1]: out that we have one model of governance, which is Congress, centralized power, hold
[Guest 1]: it right at the top.
[Guest 1]: And you know, that's not really when we think about the structural reform that is required
[Guest 1]: in the various sectors, we're talking about occupational licensing, labor reform, industrial
[Guest 1]: reform.
[Guest 1]: I don't think you're going to get that in that model.
[Guest 2]: It's highly unlikely.
[Guest 2]: You know, Shruti, you would have made for a very bad journalist, simply because what
[Guest 2]: you know, it took you so many words to basically, what you basically meant was NAR INDRA MODI,
[Guest 2]: you know.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, see, I would have made a bad journalist, but I'm a professor who needs to fill up 100
[Amit Varma]: minutes of class time.
[Amit Varma]: So you need to be verbose.
[Amit Varma]: Kind of now, microscoping down and moving from the sort of the large issue that we've
[Amit Varma]: been talking about and coming back to jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something again, Vivek, you and I have discussed on a previous podcast, we
[Amit Varma]: had a podcast just on jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And given that Mr. Modi is focusing more on optics with, you know, all these fancy images
[Amit Varma]: of pakorawala earning 200 a day being what he's selling, you know, are you optimistic
[Amit Varma]: or pessimistic about what's going to happen in the near future?
[Guest 2]: Where is the ray of hope?
[Guest 2]: I'm extremely pessimistic.
[Guest 2]: I, in fact, earlier in the day, I just wrote a piece which I headlined, India has lost
[Guest 2]: its bus out of poverty.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so I am extremely pessimistic.
[Guest 1]: I'm very pessimistic about the government and what the government can do to improve
[Guest 1]: our lot in life.
[Guest 1]: I'm very optimistic about individual creativity and entrepreneurship and ingenuity.
[Guest 1]: And Amit, you and I have had this conversation many times over, you even call it the million
[Guest 1]: mutinies after Mr. Naipaul.
[Amit Varma]: Actually it's a mutual friend, Varun Mitra has, you know, invoked that Naipaul term in
[Guest 1]: this context, a million mutinies, and also credit to Varun for it.
[Guest 1]: Oh wonderful.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so fantastic Varun.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Varun is amazing.
[Guest 1]: Well, everybody should follow Varun Mitra on Twitter and in life, he is fantastic.
[Guest 1]: But I think that is what I'm optimistic about.
[Guest 1]: I'm still very optimistic about the average Indian.
[Guest 1]: I mean, look at Indians, they survived a disaster like demonetization.
[Guest 1]: Because Indians are fundamentally intelligent, entrepreneurial, try and find a way to get
[Guest 1]: by despite all the oppression of the state.
[Guest 1]: And once in a way, while they are just getting by and just sort of surviving, you see the
[Guest 1]: incredible idea, you see the incredible entrepreneurship, you see the next hero.
[Amit Varma]: So that I'm very optimistic about the Indian people.
[Amit Varma]: The flip side of that might well be that they survived just by being fatalistic, not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: optimistic.
[Amit Varma]: You know what?
[Guest 2]: Fatalism is our optimism, you know.
[Guest 1]: No, but what I like about India is, you know, like Mrs. Joan Robinson said that anything
[Guest 1]: you say about India, the opposite is also true.
[Guest 1]: So if there is a very large group which is fatalistic, then there's a very large group
[Guest 1]: that is entrepreneurial and clever and ingenious and will come out of it also.
[Guest 1]: So a large enough group of people that we're talking about, that I think that we can easily
[Guest 1]: find the million mutinies that we're looking for.
[Amit Varma]: On that marvelously optimistic or pessimistic note, whichever way you look at it, for We
[Amit Varma]: Contain Multitudes, I'll thank you both for coming on the show where we agreed and disagreed
[Amit Varma]: so much because everything happened.
[Amit Varma]: And it's always a pleasure talking to both of you guys.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope we can continue to do so in future after Mr. Modi listens to this particular
[Amit Varma]: episode.
[Guest 2]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest 1]: Hi.
[Guest 1]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest 1]: I mean, for inviting me when I pretty much just sort of elbowed my way into this conversation.
[Guest 1]: And I wanted to make two plugs.
[Guest 1]: One, when you talked about Indian colors, you guys can't see it because I'm not in the
[Guest 1]: studio.
[Guest 1]: I'm actually wearing a Haren Vakil scarf with the jazz player and the other plug that everybody
[Guest 1]: should read Vivek's book.
[Guest 1]: It's marvelous.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: If you read this book, give big government and why it's hurting you and indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you guys.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, you can follow Shruti on Twitter at S Raj Gopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vivek on Twitter at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to listen to more great podcasts from India, check out IVM podcasts, just download
[Amit Varma]: their app, like them on Facebook or Twitter, and you'll find many more great shows for
[Amit Varma]: archives of the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Please head on over to seen unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: I've done plenty of episodes with both Vivek and Shruti, though never together before this.
[Amit Varma]: So do check those out.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, it makes complete sense for you to
[Amit Varma]: check out the Pragati podcast, a show on public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Pragati is a magazine I edit and the Pragati podcast is hosted by two of my colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: Every week, Pawan and Hamsini analyze views and news from India and the world and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts and practitioners on a wide range of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday.
[Unknown]: So there's your mid-week fix right there.